It is a common delusion of those who discuss contemporary literature
that there is such an entity as the “reading public,” possessed of a
certain uniformity of taste. There is not one public; there are many
publics--as many, in fact, as there are different kinds of taste; and
the extent of an author’s popularity is in proportion to the number of
these separate publics he may chance to please. Scott, for example,
appealed not only to those who relished romance and enjoyed excitement,
but also to those who appreciated his honest portrayal of sturdy
characters. Thackeray is preferred by ambitious youth who are
insidiously flattered by his tacit compliments to their knowledge of the
world, by the disenchanted who cannot help seeing the petty meannesses
of society, and by the less sophisticated in whom sentiment has not gone
to seed in sentimentality. Dickens in his own day bid for the approval
of those who liked broad caricature (and were therefore pleased with
Stiggins and Chadband), of those who fed greedily on plentiful pathos
(and were therefore delighted with the deathbeds of Smike and Paul
Dombey and Little Nell) and also of those who asked for unexpected
adventure (and were therefore glad to disentangle the melodramatic
intrigues of Ralph Nickleby).

In like manner the American author who has chosen to call himself Mark
Twain has attained to an immense popularity because the qualities he
possesses in a high degree appeal to so many and so widely varied
publics--first of all, no doubt, to the public that revels in hearty and
robust fun, but also to the public which is glad to be swept along by
the full current of adventure, which is sincerely touched by manly
pathos, which is satisfied by vigorous and exact portrayal of character,
and which respects shrewdness and wisdom and sanity and a healthy hatred
of pretense and affectation and sham. Perhaps no one book of Mark
Twain’s--with the possible exception of _Huckleberry Finn_--is equally a
favorite with all his readers; and perhaps some of his best
characteristics are absent from his earlier books or but doubtfully
latent in them. Mark Twain is many sided; and he has ripened in
knowledge and in power since he first attracted attention as a wild
Western funny man. As he has grown older he has reflected more; he has
both broadened and deepened. The writer of “comic copy” for a
mining-camp newspaper has developed into a liberal humorist, handling
life seriously and making his readers think as he makes them laugh,
until to-day Mark Twain has perhaps the largest audience of any author
now using the English language. To trace the stages of this evolution
and to count the steps whereby the sagebrush reporter has risen to the
rank of a writer of world-wide celebrity, is as interesting as it is
instructive.
